doc: dts: Add lots of documentation for generated macros (#22782)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/dts/index.rst

Generated macros
================

> Take this devicetree node as an example:

Reviewer: Thanks for using the correct form. It is indeed, according to the spec `devicetree`, and not `Devicetree`, `Device Tree` or `Device tree`

    The instance number is a unique index among all enabled
    (``status = "okay"``) nodes that have a particular compatible string,
    counting from zero. For example, if there are two enabled nodes that have
    ``compatible = "foo,uart"``, then these node prefixes get generated:

    .. code:: none

        DT_INST_0_FOO_UART
        DT_INST_1_FOO_UART

``DT_ALIAS_<alias>``
    Generated from the names of any properties in the ``/aliases`` node that
    point to the node.

    For example, assume ``/aliases`` looks like this:

    .. code-block:: none

       aliases {
               uart-1 = &uart1;
       };

    The alias name (``i2c-1``) is converted to ``I2C_1`` by uppercasing and
    replacing non-alphanumeric characters with underscores, generating the node
    prefix ``DT_ALIAS_UART_1`` for the ``&uart1`` node.

    .. note::

       Currently, an older deprecated ``DT_<compatible>_<alias>`` form is also
       generated for aliases. For the example above, assuming the compatible
       string for the ``&uart1`` node is ``"foo,uart"``, this gives
       ``DT_FOO_UART_UART_1``.

       Work is underway to replace this form with ``DT_ALIAS_*``.

> Property suffixes

Reviewer 2: Node Property suffixes?

Author: Might be clear from context. `Node prefixes`/`Node property suffixes` seems a bit weird.

-----------------

Macros for particular properties on nodes have the form
``DT_<node>_<property>``, where ``<node>`` is one the node prefixes from the
section above, and ``<property>`` identifies the property.

> For all properties except ``reg``, ``<property>`` is just the property name

Reviewer 3: First off, thanks for taking the time to improve the documentation. The information contained here looks good.

However, I do have some concerns.

I think this sentence is oversimplifying things too much, and I find myself agreeing with @pabigot's comment from the dev review meeting today that perhaps we need an "overall goals" section written down for devicetree in Zephyr before I feel like I can review this in context.

I know there is a comment at the bottom that says "this isn't the whole story", but this statement saying "for all properties except reg, <etc.>" is not correct.

There are many node properties which are exceptions to this rule.

- array type properties (array and string-array at least) get per-element macros with `_<i>` suffixes too (though this is not consistent, since uint8-array gets an initializer but no per-element macros)
- properties with type phandle-array have their own set of macros that take over a page to describe, which in part relates closely to the privileged position of the `label` property
- enums in the bindings generate `DT_<NODE>_<PROPERTY>_ENUM` macros
- flash partitions are partially covered in flash_partitions.inc, but their "label" properties are also handled as a special case
- interrupt tree properties (like `interrupts`) are handled as a special case
- clock tree properties (like `clocks`) are also a special case
- properties related to SPI device chip select data (cs-gpios properties) are a special case

Given that, I wonder where this is going:

1. Is this PR meant to be a step towards telling something closer to the whole story?
2. Are we always going to have a "RTFS" (read the fine source) comment left at the bottom?
3. Is that still up in the air?

I think getting some more context about where Zephyr is going with DT would help clear this up for me.

Thanks.

Author: The plan is just to document a bunch of cryptic stuff that's currently undocumented, to make the macros look less like a bunch of random stuff shoved together with underscores. More high-level documentation might be nice at some point too, but first the low-level stuff needs to be understandable.

I'll try not to lie anywhere.

Reviewer 3: > More high-level documentation might be nice at some point too, but first the low-level stuff needs to be understandable.

If this means "it's a step towards telling something closer to the whole story" (item 1. in the list above) by documenting the current state of the world, then OK.

But a high level view of what the destination is from the perspective of Zephyr's users is not a "nice" thing to have "at some point" IMO. It's a critical step 1.

it, it is a good idea to first go through the documentation for
``phandle-array`` in :ref:`bindings`.

Take the following devicetree nodes and binding contents as an example:

.. code-block:: none
   :caption: Devicetree nodes for PWM controllers

   pwm-ctrl-0: pwm-controller-0 {
   	compatible = "vendor,pwm-controller";
   	label = "PWM_0";
   	#pwm-cells = <2>;
   	...
   };

   pwm-ctrl-1: pwm-controller-1 {
   	compatible = "vendor,pwm-controller";
   	label = "PWM_1";
   	#pwm-cells = <2>;
   	...
   };

.. code-block:: yaml
   :caption: ``pwm-cells`` declaration in binding for ``vendor-pwm-controller``

   pwm-cells:
       - channel
       - period

Assume the property assignment looks like this:

.. code-block:: none

   pwms = <&pwm-ctrl-0 1 10
           &pwm-ctrl-1 2 20>;

These macros then get generated:

.. code-block:: none

   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CONTROLLER_0    "PWM_0"
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CHANNEL_0       1
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_PERIOD_0        10

   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CONTROLLER_1    "PWM_1"
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CHANNEL_1       2
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_PERIOD_1        20

>    /* Initializers */

Reviewer 4: Do we have support for that in the tree? I thought it will be implemented in #21393

Author: Yup, already supported.

Honestly, I'm just reverse-engineering this stuff from the code as I go. Even though I wrote most of it, it's hard for me to keep track of how all of it works, because it just emulates the logic in the old scripts.

| ``array``        | ``foo = <1 2>``        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_0 1``        |
|                  |                        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_1 2``        |
|                  |                        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO {1, 2}``     |
+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``string``       | ``foo = "bar"``        | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO "bar"``        |
+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``string-array`` | ``foo = "bar", "baz"`` | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_0 "bar"``    |
|                  |                        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_1 "baz"``    |
+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``uint8-array``  | ``foo = [01 02]``      | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO {0x01, 0x02}`` |
+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+

For ``type: boolean``, the generated macro is set to 1 if the property exists
on the node, and to 0 otherwise:

.. code-block:: none

   #define DT_<node>_FOO 0/1

> 

Reviewer 2: Change added.

the name instead of an index. For example, ``pwm-names = "first", "second"``
together with the example property generates these additional macros:

.. code-block:: none

   #define DT_<node>_FIRST_PWMS_CONTROLLER    "PWM_0"
   #define DT_<node>_FIRST_PWMS_CHANNEL       1
   #define DT_<node>_FIRST_PWMS_PERIOD        10

   #define DT_<node>_SECOND_PWMS_CONTROLLER   "PWM_1"
   #define DT_<node>_SECOND_PWMS_CHANNEL      2
   #define DT_<node>_SECOND_PWMS_PERIOD       20

   ...

Values for properties generated from ``clocks``
-----------------------------------------------

Clocks work the same as other ``phandle-array`` properties, except the
generated macros have ``CLOCK`` in them instead of ``CLOCKS``, giving for
example ``DT_<node>_CLOCK_CONTROLLER_0`` instead of
``DT_<node>_CLOCKS_CONTROLLER_0``.

.. note::

   This inconsistency might be fixed in the future.

In addition, if the clock controller node has a ``fixed-clock`` property, it is
expected to also have a ``clock-frequency`` property giving the frequency, and
an additional macro is generated:

.. code-block::

   #define DT_<node>_CLOCKS_CLOCK_FREQUENCY <frequency>

> Maros generated from ``enum:`` keys

Reviewer 2: Fixed

   #define DT_INST_0_NXP_KINETIS_SIM_LABEL             DT_NXP_KINETIS_SIM_40047000_LABEL
   #define DT_INST_0_NXP_KINETIS_SIM                   1

All macros generated from devicetree start with ``DT_`` and use all-uppercase.

> Most macro names contain a node identifier, and macros that correspond to

Reviewer: is this statement too generic? isn't "node identifier" just too generic? is it a phandle, a compatible, an instance?

Reviewer: I see the next section expands on this quite a bit, fair enough.

devicetree properties also contain an identifier for the property.

Node identifiers in macro names
-------------------------------

Macros generated from particular devicetree nodes start with ``DT_<node>``,
where ``<node>`` identifies the node. Several identifiers are generated for
nodes:

``DT_(<bus>_)<compatible>_<unit-address>``
    The compatible string for the node followed by its unit address. If the
    node has several compatible strings, the first one that matched a binding
    is used.

>     If the node appears on a bus (has ``on-bus:`` in its binding), then the

Reviewer: Would be good to clearly state that if it doesn't appear on a bus, then this part is omitted. Also an example would be great.

    compatible string and unit address of the bus node is put before the
    compatible string for the node itself.

    For nodes that don't have a unit address (no ``...@<address>`` in the node
    name), the unit address of the parent node is used instead. If the parent
    node has no unit address either, the name of the node is used for
    ``<unit-address>``, as a fallback.

    For the ``sim@40047000`` node above, the compatible string is
    ``"nxp,kinetis-sim"``. This gets converted to ``NXP_KINETIS_SIM`` by
    uppercasing and replacing non-alphanumeric characters with underscores.
    Adding the unit address gives the node prefix
    ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_SIM_40047000``.

``DT_INST_<instance-no.>_<compatible>``
    The compatible string for the node together with an instance number.

>     The instance number is a unique index among all enabled

Reviewer: Please add a note that this does not in any way match the datasheet instance, and that there is no guarantee that two builds will yield the same instance numbers (which I find weird btw, but OK).

Reviewer 2: Here's what I'm adding:

```
       The instance numbers in no way reflect any numbering scheme that
       might exist for the SoC.  There is no guarantee that the same device
       node is given the same instance number between builds.  The only
       guarantee is that instance numbers will start at 0 and be contingous
       for the number of compatiable instances that are enabled.
```

Reviewer: One more thing @galak, I would add that it is also completely unrelated to numbers appearing in the the node label or node name. For example:
```
&uart0 {
	compatible = "nordic,nrf-uart";
	status = "okay";
	current-speed = <115200>;
	tx-pin = <6>;
	rx-pin = <8>;
	rts-pin = <5>;
	cts-pin = <7>;
};
```

there is no guarantee that this will end up as `DT_INST_0`

Reviewer 2: Changed to:

```
       The instance numbers in no way reflect any numbering scheme that
       might exist for the SoC, in any node labels, or unit addresses for the 
       node.  The instance number is a pure count of enabled nodes with the
       same compatible.  There is no guarantee that the same device
       node is given the same instance number between builds.  The only
       guarantee is that instance numbers will start at 0 and be contiguous
       for the number of compatible instances that are enabled.
```

    (``status = "okay"``) nodes that have a particular compatible string,
    counting from zero. For example, if there are two enabled nodes that have
    ``compatible = "foo,uart"``, then these node prefixes get generated:

    .. code-block:: none

       DT_INST_0_FOO_UART
       DT_INST_1_FOO_UART

``DT_ALIAS_<alias>``
    Generated from the names of any properties in the ``/aliases`` node that
    point to the node. See :ref:`dt-alias-chosen` for an overview.

    For example, assume ``/aliases`` looks like this:

    .. code-block:: none

       aliases {
               uart-1 = &uart1;
       };

    The alias name (``i2c-1``) is converted to ``I2C_1`` by uppercasing and
    replacing non-alphanumeric characters with underscores, generating the node
    prefix ``DT_ALIAS_UART_1`` for the ``&uart1`` node.

    .. note::

       Currently, an older deprecated ``DT_<compatible>_<alias>`` form is also
       generated for aliases. For the example above, assuming the compatible
       string for the ``&uart1`` node is ``"foo,uart"``, this gives
       ``DT_FOO_UART_UART_1``.

>        Work is underway to replace this form with ``DT_ALIAS_*``.

Reviewer: I would remove this sentence

Reviewer 2: Going to replace with a section on the DT_<COMPAT>_<ALIAS> defines

Property identifiers in macro names
-----------------------------------

Macros for particular properties on nodes have the form
``DT_<node>_<property>``. ``<node>`` is one the node prefixes from above, and

> ``<property>`` identifies the property.

Reviewer: It would be good to have a full example here

Reviewer 2: What are you thinking w/regards to an example here?  The specific `property` types have examples below.

Reviewer: Agreed, I was thinking about a generic example but it's covered extensively later

``array`` properties generate an additional compound initializer (``{ ... }``).

+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Type             | Example                | Generated macros                       |
+==================+========================+========================================+
| ``int``          | ``foo = <1>``          | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO 1``            |
+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``array``        | ``foo = <1 2>``        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_0 1``        |
|                  |                        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_1 2``        |
|                  |                        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO {1, 2}``     |
+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``string``       | ``foo = "bar"``        | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO "bar"``        |
+------------------+------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| ``string-array`` | ``foo = "bar", "baz"`` | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_0 "bar"``    |

> |                  |                        | | ``#define DT_<node>_FOO_1 "baz"``    |

Reviewer 2: Not for string-array.

on the node, and to 0 otherwise:

.. code-block:: none

   #define DT_<node>_FOO 0/1

For non-boolean types the property macros are not generated if the ``category``
is ``optional`` and the property is not present in the devicetree source.

The generation for properties with type ``phandle-array`` is the most complex.
To understand it, it is a good idea to first go through the documentation for
``phandle-array`` in :ref:`bindings`.

Take the following devicetree nodes and binding contents as an example:

.. code-block:: none
   :caption: Devicetree nodes for PWM controllers

   pwm-ctrl-0: pwm-controller-0 {
   	compatible = "vendor,pwm-controller";
   	label = "pwm-0";
   	#pwm-cells = <2>;
   	...
   };

   pwm-ctrl-1: pwm-controller-1 {
   	compatible = "vendor,pwm-controller";
   	label = "pwm-1";
   	#pwm-cells = <2>;
   	...
   };

.. code-block:: yaml
   :caption: ``pwm-cells`` declaration in binding for ``vendor-pwm-controller``

   pwm-cells:
       - channel
       - period

Assume the property assignment looks like this:

.. code-block:: none

   pwms = <&pwm-ctrl-0 1 10
           &pwm-ctrl-1 2 20>;

These macros then get generated:

.. code-block:: none

>    #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CONTROLLER_0    "PWM_0"

Reviewer 2: updated this to be a more real example and remove <node>

   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CHANNEL_0       1
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_PERIOD_0        10

   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CONTROLLER_1    "PWM_1"
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_CHANNEL_1       2
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_PERIOD_1        20

   /* Initializers */

   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_0               {"PWM_0", 1, 10}
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_1               {"PWM_1", 2, 20}
   #define DT_<node>_PWMS                 {<node>_PWMS_0, <node>_PWMS_1}

   #define DT_<node>_PWMS_COUNT           2

Macros with a ``*_0`` suffix deal with the first entry in ``pwms``
(``<&pwm-ctrl-0 1 10>``). Macros with a ``*_1`` suffix deal with the second
entry (``<&pwm-ctrl-1 2 20>``). The index suffix is only added if there's more
than one entry in the property.

The ``DT_<node>_PWMS_CONTROLLER(_<index>)`` macros are set to the string from

> the ``label`` property of the referenced controller. The

Reviewer 2: We are referring to the property as documented.

``DT_<node>_PWMS_CHANNEL(_<index>)`` and ``DT_<node>_PWMS_PERIOD(_<index>)``
macros are set to the values of the corresponding cells in the ``pwms``
assignment, with macro names generated from the strings in ``pwm-cells:`` in
the binding for the controller.

The macros in the ``/* Initializers */`` section provide the same information
as ``DT_<node>_PWMS_CHANNEL/PERIOD``, except as a compound initializer that can
be used to initialize a C ``struct``.

If a ``pwm-names`` property exists on the same node as ``pwms`` (or similarly
for other ``phandle-array`` properties), it gives a list of strings that names
each entry in ``pwms``. The names are used to generate extra macro names with
the name instead of an index. For example, ``pwm-names = "first", "second"``
together with the example property generates these additional macros:

.. code-block:: none

>    #define mT_<node>_FIRST_PWMS_CONTROLLER    "PWM_0"

Reviewer 2: When we have a name the index'ing isn't needed.

generate a macro that gives the the zero-based index of the property's value in
the ``enum:`` list.

Take this binding declaration as an example:

.. code-block:: yaml

   properties:
       foo:
           type: string
           enum:
               - one
               - two
               - three

The assignment ``foo = "three"`` then generates this macro:

.. code-block:: none

    #define DT_<node>_FOO_ENUM 2

Macros generated from ``reg``
-----------------------------

``reg`` properties generate the macros ``DT_<node>_BASE_ADDRESS(_<index>)`` and
``DT_<node>_SIZE(_<index>)``. ``<index>`` is a numeric index starting from 0,
which is only added if there's more than one register defined in ``reg``.

For example, the ``reg = <0x4004700 0x1060>`` assignment in the example
devicetree above gives these macros:

.. code-block:: c

   #define DT_<node>_BASE_ADDRESS    0x40047000
   #define DT_<node>_SIZE            4192

.. note::

   The length of the address and size portions of ``reg`` is determined from
   the ``#address-cells`` and ``#size-cells`` properties. See the devicetree
   specification for more information.

>    In this case, both ``#address-cells`` and ``#size-cells`` are 1, and there's

Reviewer: Could you explain what happens when those are >1 and perhaps add an example?

Reviewer: @galak this one would be good to address

   just a single register in ``reg``. Four numbers would give two registers.

If a ``reg-names`` property exists on the same node as ``reg``, it gives a list
of strings that names each register in ``reg``. The names are used to generate
extra macros. For example, ``reg-names = "foo"`` together with the example node
generates these macros:

.. code-block:: c

   #define DT_NXP_KINETIS_SIM_40047000_FOO_BASE_ADDRESS    0x40047000
   #define DT_NXP_KINETIS_SIM_40047000_FOO_SIZE            4192

Interrupt-related macros
------------------------

Take these devicetree nodes as an example:

.. code-block:: none

   timer@123 {
   	compatible = "vendor,timer";
   	interrupts = <1 5 2 6>;
   	interrupt-parent = <&intc>;
   };

   intc: interrupt-controller {
   	compatible = "vendor,intc";
   };

> Assume that the binding for the interrupt controller (which would have

Reviewer: No `#address-cells` or `#size-cells` possible here?

Reviewer: @galak ?

Bindings for interrupt controllers are expected to declare a cell named ``irq``
in ``interrupt-cells``, giving the interrupt number. The ``_<name>`` suffix is
skipped for macros generated from ``irq`` cells, which is why there's e.g. a
``DT_VENDOR_TIMER_123_IRQ_0`` macro and no ``DT_VENDOR_TIMER_123_IRQ_0_IRQ``
macro.

If the interrupt controller in turn generates other interrupts, a multi-level
interrupt encoding is used for the interrupt number. See
:ref:`multi_level_interrupts` for more information.

Additional macros that use names instead of indices for interrupts can be
generated by including an ``interrupt-names`` property on the
interrupt-generating node. For example, ``interrupt-names = "timer-a",
"timer-b"`` gives these extra macros:

.. code-block:: c

   #define DT_VENDOR_TIMER_123_IRQ_TIMER_A             1
   #define DT_VENDOR_TIMER_123_IRQ_TIMER_A_PRIORITY    5
   #define DT_VENDOR_TIMER_123_IRQ_TIMER_B             2
   #define DT_VENDOR_TIMER_123_IRQ_TIMER_B_PRIORITY    6

Values for properties generated from ``clocks``
-----------------------------------------------

Clocks work the same as other ``phandle-array`` properties, except the

> generated macros have ``CLOCK`` in them instead of ``CLOCKS``, giving for

Reviewer: what about the actual source in the `.dts` files? is it `clock` or `clocks`? we should probably state it here.

Reviewer 2: Its `clocks` which I take from the section header

Reviewer 2: Try to make that more explicit with the Clocks work the same -> ``clocks`` work the same ...

example ``DT_<node>_CLOCK_CONTROLLER_0`` instead of
``DT_<node>_CLOCKS_CONTROLLER_0``.

.. note::

   This inconsistency might be fixed in the future.

In addition, if the clock controller node has a ``fixed-clock`` property, it is
expected to also have a ``clock-frequency`` property giving the frequency, and
an additional macro is generated:

.. code-block:: c

   #define DT_<node>_CLOCKS_CLOCK_FREQUENCY <frequency>

Macros related to SPI GPIO chip select
--------------------------------------

.. boards/arm/sensortile_box/sensortile_box.dts has a real-world example

Take these devicetree nodes as an example. where the binding for
``vendor,spi-controller`` is assumed to have ``bus: spi``, and the bindings for
the SPI slaves are assumed to have ``on-bus: spi``:

.. code-block:: none

   spi {
	compatible = "vendor,spi-controller";
	cs-gpios = <&gpioa 1>, <&gpioa 2>;
	spi-slave@0 {
		compatible "vendor,foo-spi-device";
		reg = <0>;
	};
	spi-slave@1 {
		compatible "vendor,bar-spi-device";
		reg = <1>;
	}
   };

> Here, the unit address of the SPI slaves (0 and 1) is taken as a chip select

Reviewer: This paragraph I find confusing. what is a "chip select address"?

Reviewer 2: changed address to number.

address, which is used as an index into ``cs-gpios`` (a ``phandle-array``).
``spi-slave@0`` is matched to ``<&gpioa 1>``, and ``spi-slave@1`` to
``<&gpiob 2>``.

The output for ``spi-slave@0`` and ``spi-slave@1`` is the same as if the
devicetree had looked like this:

.. code-block:: none

   spi {
	compatible = "vendor,spi-controller";
	spi-slave@0 {
		compatible "vendor,foo-spi-device";
		reg = <0>;
		cs-gpios = <&gpioa 1>;
	};
	spi-slave@1 {
		compatible "vendor,bar-spi-device";
		reg = <1>;
		cs-gpios = <&gpioa 2>;
	}
   };

See the ``phandle-array`` section in :ref:`dt-property-macros` for more
information.

> For example, if the ``&gpioa`` node has ``label = "GPIOA"`` and 1 and 2 are pin

Reviewer: node label or label property?

Reviewer 2: Tried to clean this up.

   #define DT_<node>_CS_GPIOS_CONTROLLER    "GPIOA"
   #define DT_<node>_CS_GPIOS_PIN           1

Compatible-string and node existence macros
-------------------------------------------

An existence flag is written for each compatible strings that appears on some
enabled node:

.. code-block:: none

   #define DT_COMPAT_<compatible> 1

An existence flag is also written for all enabled nodes that matched some
binding:

.. code-block:: none

   #define DT_INST_<instance-no.>_<compatible>    1

For the example ``sim@40047000`` node above, assuming the node is the first
node with ``compatible = "nxp,kinetis-sim"``, the macros look like this:

.. code-block:: c

   #define DT_COMPAT_NXP_KINETIS_SIM    1
   #define DT_INST_0_NXP_KINETIS_SIM    1

Bus-related macros
------------------

These macros get generated for nodes that appear on buses (have ``on-bus:`` in
their binding):

.. code-block:: none

   #define DT_<node>_BUS_NAME                "<bus-label>"
   #define DT_<compatible>_BUS_<bus-name>    1

``<bus-label>`` is taken from the ``label`` property on the bus node, which
must exist. ``<bus-name>`` is the identifier for the bus as given in
``on-bus:`` in the binding.

> .. _reg_macros:

Reviewer: is this wrong? `reg_macros` for flash partitions?

Reviewer 2: Fixed, forgot to move the anchor.

   			label = "image-0";
   			reg = <0x00010000 0x00020000
   			       0x00040000 0x00010000>;
   		};
   		...
   	}

These macros then get generated:

.. code-block:: c

   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_ID           0
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_READ_ONLY    1
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_OFFSET_0     0x0
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_SIZE_0       0x10000
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_OFFSET       DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_OFFSET_0
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_SIZE         DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_SIZE_0
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_MCUBOOT_DEV          "foo-flash"

   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_ID           0
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_READ_ONLY    1
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_OFFSET_0     0x10000
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_SIZE_0       0x20000
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_OFFSET_1     0x40000
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_SIZE_1       0x10000
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_OFFSET       DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_OFFSET_0
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_SIZE         DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_SIZE_0
   #define DT_FLASH_AREA_IMAGE_0_DEV          "foo-flash"

   /* Same macros, just with index instead of label */

>    #define DT_FLASH_AREA_0_ID           0

Reviewer: Why is this in italics?

Reviewer 3: It's not; GitHub just isn't rendering it properly. Are you seeing italics in the rendered HTML output?

   #define DT_INST_0_NXP_KINETIS_SIM_LABEL             DT_NXP_KINETIS_SIM_40047000_LABEL
   #define DT_INST_0_NXP_KINETIS_SIM                   1

All macros generated from devicetree start with ``DT_`` and use all-uppercase.
Most macro names contain a node identifier, and macros that correspond to
devicetree properties also contain an identifier for the property.

Node identifiers in macro names
-------------------------------

Macros generated from particular devicetree nodes start with ``DT_<node>``,

> where ``<node>`` identifies the node. Several identifiers are generated for

Reviewer 3: The introductory paragraph is written in terms of "identifiers" (without the `DT_`), but the body mostly uses "prefix"  (which has the `DT_`).

I think writing everything in terms of just one of them (my preference would be "identifier") would be more understandable.

Reviewer 2: replaced prefix everywhere with identifier

Reviewer 3: That's not quite what I'm saying. Only the `<node>` part is the identifier -- the part without the `DT_`. The entire `DT_<node>` is what's being called a "prefix".

nodes:

``DT_(<bus>_)<compatible>_<unit-address>``
    The compatible string for the node followed by its unit address. If the
    node has several compatible strings, the first one that matched a binding
    is used.

    If the node appears on a bus (has ``on-bus:`` in its binding), then the
    compatible string and unit address of the bus node is put before the
    compatible string for the node itself.  If the node does not appear on

>     a bus (no ``on-bus:`` in the binding) than there will be no bus portion

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    a bus (no ``on-bus:`` in the binding) then there will be no bus portion
```

               reg = < 0x40066000 0x1000 >;

               fxos8700@1d {
                       compatible = "nxp,fxos8700";
                       reg = < 0x1d >;
               };
       };

    For the ``i2c@40066000`` node above, the compatible string is
    ``"nxp,kinetis-i2c"``. This gets converted to ``NXP_KINETIS_I2C`` by
    uppercasing and replacing non-alphanumeric characters with underscores.
    Adding the unit address gives the node prefix
    ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_I2C_40066000``.

    For the ``fxos8700@1d`` node above, since the binding specifies ``on-bus: i2c``
    the bus portion of the node prefix will be: ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_I2C_40066000``.
    The device node portion of the prefix will be ``NXP_FXOS8700_1D``.  The full
    node prefix will be: ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_I2C_40066000_NXP_FXOS8700_1D``.

    .. code-block:: none

       ethernet@400c0004 {
               compatible = "nxp,kinetis-ethernet";
               reg = < 0x400c0004 0x620 >;
               status = "okay";
               ptp {
                       compatible = "nxp,kinetis-ptp";
                       status = "okay";
                       interrupts = < 0x52 0x0 >;
               };
       };

>     For the ``ptp`` node above, since the node has no unit address the unit

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For the ``ptp`` node above, since the node has no unit address, the unit
```

>     address portion will combined the parent's unit address and the nodes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    address portion will combine the parent's unit address and the node's
```

    will be: ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_PTP_400C0004_PTP``.

    .. code-block:: none

       soc {
              temp1 {
                      compatible = "nxp,kinetis-temperature";
                      status = "okay";
              };
       };

    For the ``temp1`` node above, since the node has no unit address the unit
    address portion and the parent has no unit address we will utilize the
    nodes name ``TEMP1`` as the unit address portion.
    The full node prefix that combines the node compatible and unit address
    will be: ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_TEMPERATURE_TEMP1``.

``DT_INST_<instance-no.>_<compatible>``
    The compatible string for the node together with an instance number.

    The instance number is a unique index among all enabled
    (``status = "okay"``) nodes that have a particular compatible string,
    counting from zero. For example, if there are two enabled nodes that have
    ``compatible = "foo,uart"``, then these node prefixes get generated:

    .. code-block:: none

       DT_INST_0_FOO_UART
       DT_INST_1_FOO_UART

    .. note::

       The instance numbers in no way reflect any numbering scheme that

>        might exist for the SoC, in any node labels, or unit addresses for the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       might exist in SoC documentation, node labels, or node unit addresses.
```

>        node.  The instance number is a pure count of enabled nodes with the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       The instance number is a simple index among enabled nodes with the
```

       same compatible.  There is no guarantee that the same device
       node is given the same instance number between builds.  The only

>        guarantee is that instance numbers will start at 0 and be contiguous

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       guarantee is that instance numbers will start at 0, be contiguous,
```

>        for the number of compatible instances that are enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       and be assigned for each enabled node with a matching compatible.
```

``DT_ALIAS_<alias>``

>     Generated from the names of any properties in the ``/aliases`` node that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Generated from the names of any properties in the ``/aliases`` node.
```

>     point to the node. See :ref:`dt-alias-chosen` for an overview.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    See :ref:`dt-alias-chosen` for an overview.
```

    For example, assume ``/aliases`` looks like this:

    .. code-block:: none

       aliases {
               uart-1 = &uart1;
       };

    The alias name (``uart-1``) is converted to ``UART_1`` by uppercasing and
    replacing non-alphanumeric characters with underscores, generating the node
    prefix ``DT_ALIAS_UART_1`` for the ``&uart1`` node.

    .. note::

       Currently, an older deprecated ``DT_<compatible>_<alias>`` form is also
       generated for aliases. For the example above, assuming the compatible
       string for the ``&uart1`` node is ``"foo,uart"``, this gives
       ``DT_FOO_UART_UART_1``.

       Work is underway to replace this form with ``DT_ALIAS_*``.

Property identifiers in macro names
-----------------------------------

Macros for particular properties on nodes have the form

> ``DT_<node>_<property>``. ``<node>`` is one the node prefixes from above, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``DT_<node>_<property>``, where ``<node>`` is a node identifier (see above), and
```

``<property>`` identifies the property.

> For all properties except ``reg`` (:ref:`documented below <reg_macros>`),

Reviewer 3: I think this is still not corrected from my initial review:

https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/22782#discussion_r379151969

The truth is a lot more complex than this (over-)simplification.

Reviewer 2: Fixed, reworked the wording there.

    address portion will combine the parent's unit address and the node's
    name.  The unit address portion of the identifier will be: ``400C0004_PTP``.
    The full node identifier that combines the node compatible and unit address
    will be: ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_PTP_400C0004_PTP``.

    .. code-block:: none

       soc {
              temp1 {
                      compatible = "nxp,kinetis-temperature";
                      status = "okay";
              };
       };

    For the ``temp1`` node above, since the node has no unit address the unit
    address portion and the parent has no unit address we will utilize the
    nodes name ``TEMP1`` as the unit address portion.
    The full node identifier that combines the node compatible and unit address
    will be: ``DT_NXP_KINETIS_TEMPERATURE_TEMP1``.

``DT_INST_<instance-no.>_<compatible>``
    The compatible string for the node together with an instance number.

    The instance number is a unique index among all enabled
    (``status = "okay"``) nodes that have a particular compatible string,
    counting from zero. For example, if there are two enabled nodes that have

>     ``compatible = "foo,uart"``, then these node identifiers get generated:

Reviewer 3: So e.g. the `DT_INST_0_FOO_UART` below is a prefix, not an identifier. `INST_0_FOO_UART` is the identifier.

       and be assigned for each enabled node with a matching compatible.

``DT_ALIAS_<alias>``
    Generated from the names of any properties in the ``/aliases`` node.
    See :ref:`dt-alias-chosen` for an overview.

    For example, assume ``/aliases`` looks like this:

    .. code-block:: none

       aliases {
               uart-1 = &uart1;
       };

    The alias name (``uart-1``) is converted to ``UART_1`` by uppercasing and
    replacing non-alphanumeric characters with underscores, generating the node
    identifier ``DT_ALIAS_UART_1`` for the ``&uart1`` node.

    .. note::

       Currently, an older deprecated ``DT_<compatible>_<alias>`` form is also
       generated for aliases. For the example above, assuming the compatible
       string for the ``&uart1`` node is ``"foo,uart"``, this gives
       ``DT_FOO_UART_UART_1``.

       Work is underway to replace this form with ``DT_ALIAS_*``.

Property identifiers in macro names
-----------------------------------

Macros for particular properties on nodes have the form
``DT_<node>_<property>``, where ``<node>`` is a node identifier (see above), and
``<property>`` identifies the property.

> For following ``<property>`` have special case handling:

Reviewer: nit: grammar
